# 2019.8.28
I'm better off with ...

# 2019.8.29
The main reason

*The reason is main

predicative, attributive, postpositive usage of adjectives: why?

Flawed sentences:
Addresses either didn't exist, they weren't accurate enough, or they were really difficult to communicate.

A sentence produced by a native speaker

---

Once I expected that adjunction can be trivially reduced to Merge. An operation where α is adjoined to β may be reduced to the following procedures:
1. Merge α with β, and designate the head to α
2. Put essential categorical properties of β (for example [N], [V]) to the label of the new constituent

This postulation cannot apply to adjunction to intermediate projections, like S-adverbs' adjunction to T'. It seems like relativization does not work in this case either.

---

A possible approach of so-called discontinuous spellout:

there is what hope of finding survivors -> 

what hope of finding survivors is there ->

what hope is there of finding survivors

*Of finding survivors* undergoes rightward movement.

Another way is to assume *what hope* indeed forms a constituent and functions as the subject of PP, and *of finding survivors* acts like a predicate. This approach captures the fact that 

*What kind is there of hope ...

since kind may be analyzed as a classifier or something. Consider the following minimal pair:

*What bag is there of tea?
(Expected Answer: There is a bag of tea placed on the table.)

*How many bags are there of tea?

What bag is there for him?

How many bags are there for him?

---

How to 

# 2019.10.5
- left aligned
- right aligned
- world famous

The structure?